Well, was this steam engine that was pulling
the... I'm pretty sure it was. There's all steam
back then. Was it like a locomotive? Yeah, but it
was small, I think. It was just a little small
locomotive. Did they use the lignite to... Yeah,
fire the boilers. Fire the boilers. They used the
lignite over here on the Gene Railroad, too. Well,
it's the Missouri Pacific now. It used to be the I
and Gene, you know. Right. International and
Great Northern. You see them longhorn cattle go by
over there in the Carlos. Longhorn cattle. Yeah,
the Texas coal mine was on the spur of it. Yeah, nice
empty.
But this Sanity mine over here was a... I think they
put out quite a bit of coal, too. Santa Fe? Mm-hmm.
Santa Fe. Did your dad cut timber in Santa Fe? He
sure did. He sure did, you see. I went with him to
open gates, you see. And we'd come out back this
road here and go over to where we lived.
Uh-huh. Do you know when the Santa Fe mine was
operating? Let me ask you this. When did your dad
cut timber? How old were you? I was about 9, 10.
Eight, nine, ten, eleven, along there, you know.
So that would be? I was born in 1904. Something like
that. Oh, yes. Did your daddy and his brother talk
about the mines very much, or was most of the talk at
the dinner table? Well, that was just his
brother-in-law, you know. You see, that was his
mama's, my uncle, my mother's brother that worked
in the mine, you see. My daddy's brother didn't
work in the mines. Did they talk about mining at the
dinner table? Not so much, not so much. It was just
an everyday deal with them. It wasn't nothing
unusual. Just get the coal out. Get the coal out and
get it going. Make that little paycheck. Do you
remember the big rains in the early 20s? It was a big
flood, I believe. Yeah, I believe that. I do
remember that. Did it harm your house at all? No.
No, it didn't. Do you remember what effect it had on
the coal mines? Coal mines? No, I really don't
remember that. No,
my granddaddy at McCoy built him a real good house.
He was a carpenter, too. Both of my granddaddies
were carpenters. He built him a real good house. It
was a two-story. It wasn't nothing fine, but it was
good. And he painted it. And he had the, like I said,
two-story. And it was all right. My daddy, he built
his house, just a common old farmhouse. But he
built it good. And it didn't damage it. I love to
tell, hear my daddy tell about though, he built a
house in 1900, that's where I was born. He built it
himself out of logs and notched them, and he built
the roof himself. He arrived aboard, as he called
them, and made one of them homemade roofs. And when
that 1900 flood come, hurricane, he'd say, it
didn't leak a drop. See? Oh, so he built it down? He
built a house, you see, in the year of, you don't
know, because you can't remember. The Galveston
Flood. A hurricane. Him and Mama, that's where I
was born, see. They lived in Galveston? No, no,
they lived over here on Grandpa McCoy's place. He
built the house himself, you see what I say. He was
so proud of it because he built it himself on his
daddy-in-law's place, and he made the boards
himself and put them up there. All that rain and
rain and wind coming in. He said it didn't leak a
drop. He was so proud of it. That's where I was born.
I can remember, of course. People could do things
back those days, you know? Yeah, uh-huh. They did
not in such a hurry. He could do it. He could arrive
in those boards some way with a, you know.
But you don't remember about the rains in the
1920s? No, not really.
I thought lots of times people ought to keep a
better record of a lot of things that'd be worth to
them in the future, you know. But we go along for a
haphazard, you know, and don't think much about
it. For instance, some of these antiques. That
would be antiques now if we'd have saved them. Just
maybe throw them away or something, you know.
Right. But we don't, we can't save everything. Oh,
no. No. That's one reason we like to do this oral
history. It's a
good way to preserve the antiques. Yeah. What
about World War I? How did that affect Rockville?
Oh, World War I, that's a terrible thing. We took
daily paper, and every morning my granddaddy
would come over there and mama would read to him.
See, he was a school teacher, but his eyes had gone
bad. She'd read to him about the war news. We had no
radios. We did have a telephone, but we had no
radios, no televisions back in World War I. Now,
you did speak of World War I. Did you have any
electricity? No. No. Coal oil lamps. Coal oil
lamps. Yeah. Cooked with wood. No electricity. No
running water. No. World War I was the same time. It
was a terrible time. Yes. Some of the boys right
here around Milano got killed over there. I was
pretty young at the time, but I remember I wrote to
one of the two of those soldiers. Just because I
knew them, not because I And just to fast, to help
it, help it. Some of them come back, some of them
didn't.
Do you remember how that... My daddy had to
register in that deal.
Did any
of the Mexican miners go out to fight? I'm sure they
did. I'm sure they did. And the black people too. Do
you remember how the mines were affected by World
War I? Did there seem to be a lot of mining activity?
Well, really and truly, like I say, I just can't
remember for sure how it did affect the mines. But
back then, people our age, you know, we was
thinking about other things. We wasn't, you know
what I mean. Young people, they don't take things
too serious, you know. I guess it's a good thing
they don't. I find that they're taking you too
seriously too young nowadays. And a few of them
don't take it serious enough. You know what I mean?
You know what I mean? They can get hooked on this
dope or something, you know, and that's bad. Or
this drunk driving. You see, my boy, the one who
works for the IGC now, he was five years in the
sheriff's office. So he learned a few things. He's
seen lots of things that was pretty bad.
But we still got lots of young, good young people.
You bet. You know, obviously now the mining camps
are no longer there. That's right. Do you have any
idea what happened to the Mexican families that
were living there? Have they moved out of
property? Well, I think they just scattered. A few
of them might have went back to old Mexico, had
people there. There's one Mexican who lived right
up here a little ways. We sure liked him. He'd come
down and talk to me sometimes. I can't even call his
name anymore, Sally Garcia, Garcia. And he taught
me a few Spanish words. And he's buried over there
next to the Spanish cemetery, Mexican cemetery.
And they just sort of scattered around. Some of
them farmed, and some of them went, a few of them.
You see, he come from old Mexico. He could remember
living in old Mexico. But he could speak some
English, you see.
Did he marry here? I think his wife come from old
Mexico. She stayed at home most of the time. She
didn't go much.
Do you
know of anybody specifically that grew up around
the mines? No, really, I don't. I imagine they're
over around there somewhere in places. Some of
them may be around Milano that grew up around the
mines. Do you know of anybody I might check, too?
Is that one thing I forgot? They did have a doctor?
Oh, yes. Well, I don't know. That is for Big Lump
now. I don't know about the other camps. This was
Dr. Rob Wallace.
He was a big man. He lived at Rockdale. That's
right. They'd call him, you know. They had
telephones back then, you know. That's about all
they did. He'd come out. Then he had a mine
inspector, too. I forgot who he was. Seemed like
one of my uncles was mine inspector for a while.
Cousin. Mr. Bullock? No. Bullock. Bullock. He was
mine inspector for a long time. You're right. But
Rob Wallace was the company doctor there. Now, how
many mining camps he took, mines he took care of, I
don't know, but he did. When my granddaddy got
hurt, that's the one that come out to him. Did you
take care of the children also, and the wives? I
don't think so. I think it was just the minors.
Well, how did the wives and kids get medical
attention? Just like, they had no insurance. They
had no insurance. They just had to pay their own.
They'd go into Rockville, and the doctor would
come out? Yeah, the doctor would come out there.
They had no hospital over there. They had doctor's
offices, and they'd come to your home. So if the...
They'd come to him. That's right. That's right.
Sure did.
But my grandpa's chest was sort of crushed and he
was broken up in here some. It took him about a year,
like I say, to die.
McCoy. Daniel McCoy. Mama's daddy. That was about
1906. Yeah, about 1906.